then what you realize is your capacity
to tap into dopamine as a motivator not
just seeking dopamine rewards that is
infinite and i i can say with with great
certainty that this is
how you were able to build a big company
and sell it how you've been able to
build a successful podcast and sell it
how you constantly seeking because
seeking is the reward
andrew huberman welcome to the show man
it's great to be here i should say dr
andrew just just so people know what
they're what they're about to get dude
it's awesome to have you back our first
interview completely melted my brain
researching you is one of my favorite
things to do the breadth of topics that
you cover is incredible
none more so than the fact that we can
get to our mind through our body which i
think is one of the most incredible
things before we started rolling though
i had this whole interview planned i
knew exactly where we were going to go
and then you made a comment i was
bringing up bitcoin and uh
cryptocurrency as i do because i'm
obsessed and you said well there's only
one biological currency and that's
dopamine that's right and i was like
well now i know where we're starting
what do you mean by that yeah so you
know human beings have evolved tons of
technologies
and currencies
bitcoin ethereum are not topics i know a
lot a lot about but when you think about
dollar euro bitcoin ethereum you think
about wins and losses
in sport in life in relationship and
anything something in your brain and
body has to keep track of that did you
win did you lose what's a letdown what's
a celebration and
i think one of the most important
findings in the last few years in
neuroscience is that
while the molecule dopamine is
associated with reward
it's more about
motivation and craving
there's a really classic experiment now
that people use to demonstrate this take
two rats
and the rats independently separate
cages can lever press
for food
uh when they can access food
there's a little bit of dopamine that's
released anytime they get some food so
we always thought that food
like many other rewards
like food sex warmth when you're cold
cool when you're too warm
is triggering the release of dopamine
but
someone had the good idea to deplete
dopamine in one of those animals
and then what you find is that the
animal without
dopamine still enjoys food
still enjoys other pleasures so dopamine
is not really involved in the enjoyment
of those pleasures it's involved in
motivation because if you make the
animal have to move just one rat's
length
believe it or not to get to that lever
the animal with dopamine will work to go
get that thing it will work through some
effort to go get the reward whereas the
animal or turns out the human without
much dopamine
can still experience pleasure they can
sit on their couch and cram their face
with pleasure inducing calories or what
have you watch pleasure-inducing things
on the television but they have very
little motivation to go pursue things
that will deliver them pleasure
so when i say dopamine is the universal
currency
of
everything what i mean is it's driving
the motivation to develop new currencies
when somebody can sit back and say uh
i'll just throw this number out let's
say somebody has a hundred thousand
bitcoins which presumably now is worth
oh my god
certainly more than it was a few years
ago
the way they can register whether or not
they are in a position of wealth or not
has everything to do with the the number
they see on the screen or in their
bitcoin wallet
but
that number is converted into a chemical
signal that has everything to do with
how much you had previously so so we
could talk about the so-called reward
prediction error how good you feel with
an experience has everything to do with
how much
you had previously
and dopamine itself is what's driving
the human species to
create these new technologies and so
while we think of currencies as the goal
it's actually what's really driven the
forward evolution of our our species has
been the desire to go seek things beyond
the confines of our skin and when i say
the common currency is dopamine what i
mean is the molecule dopamine when
secreted in the brain makes us pursue
things build things create things makes
us want new things that we don't
currently already have and so it has a
lot of dimensions to it but rather than
think about dopamine as a signal for
reward like a dopamine hit we
classically think to talk about it it's
more accurate really to think about
dopamine as driving motivation and
craving to go seek rewards that's the
rad experiment and it's a way of
tabulating where we are in our life are
we doing well or are we doing poorly and
that happens on very short time scales
like do you wake up feeling good or do
you wake up feeling kind of low
or
on long time scales if you're halfway
through a long degree or you're halfway
through your life how are you doing how
do you gauge that well it has everything
to do with how much dopamine you were
releasing in the previous days and weeks
and years so you're always comparing and
all of this is subconscious but what's
cool is that once you make these
processes conscious once you understand
a little bit about how dopamine is
released and how it changes our
perspective and our behavior then you
can actually work with it so it's one of
the
um instances where knowledge of
knowledge actually turns out to be a
really useful tool
dude that's crazy to me so one of the
things that i get hit up about all the
time is
people feel stuck
and as you like really push on them to
figure out why they feel stuck they'll
be like yeah i want to do that and but i
just you know i can't get out of bed or
i don't have the energy to pursue it or
whatever and
you get into this
common thing that people say in mindset
and i really believe it but i find it
far more interesting when you're talking
about it from a neuro chemical
standpoint which is you just don't want
it badly enough
and when i think about
my own life i sometimes worry
that i'm either more malleable than
other people or that i have a greater
ability to manipulate my dopamine
release or whatever
because i'm very good at building desire
and i like the way that desire feels now
when you use the word hunger i think
people get confused because i actually
don't enjoy being hungry for food i find
that totally unpleasurable
however being hungry for sex i find
incredibly i feel alive i feel focused i
feel energized i feel aggressive it's
complex for sure but i find that feeling
incred the the act of wanting something
in the future in in that kind or in
business and trying to build something
i've in fact that's an interesting
insight into my own self
about
i like to build
and
do we know so we dopamine is the
neurochemistry of the pursuit of making
sure that i have the energy to go but do
we know how we can spike that
well first of all it's clear to me based
on your description that you've tapped
into these
uh channels that release dopamine
because craving and wanting whether or
not it's sex or or uh money or
connection
or anything all right uh is that's the
the primary trigger for dopamine release
yeah now sex and reproduction makes the
most sense from the perspective of
evolution uh i mean any species every
species
has tends to have two primary goals one
protect it's young and second make more
of itself usually in reverse order right
so even for people that don't want
children i mean you might not or people
of course not everyone is having sex
just to reproduce but at a primordial
level that's what those circuits are
there for so every species in particular
mammalian species where there's a lot of
parenting and caretaking
of the young
tries to take make more of itself and
everything that you see like maternal
aggression which is a powerful circuit
that gets activated after
females of any species in particular
mammals give birth they will fight to
the death and they gain superhuman
strength in order to protect their young
that's a there's a known circuit for
that in the brain that gets activated
once a female has offspring
and it's robust
inside tracker is offering our listeners
25 off their entire store including
inner age 2.0 just visit
insidetracker.com
impact theory all right guys check out
inside tracker today take care and be
legendary
so interesting man like have you read
the book the female brain i have not oh
my god so i just probably lost a lot of
points but no no but you're one it'll be
super interesting because you'll know if
she's on the right track from a
neuroscience perspective i remember
reading the book at the time i thought i
was going to have kids
and i remember thinking whoa like this
book chronicles what happens to a
woman's brain and how things change and
i was like when you have kids man you
are inviting a
neurochemical change in your significant
other that is going to play itself out
in a very real way and i'd be lying if i
said that wasn't one of the things one
of the many things but one of the things
that i factored into not having kids
interesting uh and then the same with
menopause that it's this really dramatic
sort of reorganizing might not be the
right word but that it it has real
implications in the
way that the person moves just as the
decline of testosterone has in men well
in on a
on the positive side
during pregnancy the woman's hippocampus
her brain area associated with memory
and retention of information it goes
through a period in which it gets worse
for certain types of information but
then achieves superior levels of working
memory once
the babies arrive because there are a
lot of things to manage so this makes
sense this is true in rodents this is
true in humans and then in terms of the
biology of the father we now know that
when because typically parents have uh
you know does seem like one spouse
always does more than the other
but even in the most evenly divided
households
the there's usually some co-parenting of
some sort but that the father has a
big increase in the hormone prolactin
when
the mother is expecting and the
prolactin lays down body fat it prepares
for sleepless nights for women it it
sparks um the circuitry for milk letdown
for for nursing
so the dad bod has a lot to do with
prolactin this is true in in birds in
small mammals and in humans and this is
now there was a paper published in
nature
on humans specifically about this and
when you think about the relationship
between dopamine and prolactin it's it's
interesting and it takes us back to this
motivation and craving that you were
describing earlier which is that
dopamine and prolactin work in in
opposite fashion
so the the most salient example of this
is sex and reproduction where
anticipation of sex and reproduction
greatly increases dopamine
but posts
reproductive
post-sex it doesn't have to be for
reproduction there's a spark in
prolactin in the mail that's the spike
excuse me in prolactin and that spike in
prolactin is actually what sets the
refractory period during which he can't
mate again so it sets a period of
quiescence to keep
men it's repair bonding for the exchange
of chemicals through the nose to the
through the skin and through the sweat
mainly through odor uh we could talk
about pheromones if you want but that's
a topic that's somewhat controversial
the actual identity of pheromones in
humans has not been identified but there
are pheromone effects in humans
controversial in that people don't agree
what's really happening well okay so
there's this culture of biologists that
have clearly identified
pheromone effects in other in non-humans
and non-human primates
but whether or not those are
the classic definition of a pheromone
effect is that it's subconscious that
you can't actually detect the smell
however we know that smells themselves
conscious detection of them can evoke
very robust physiological responses one
one example to just stay in this arena
of of of thought is that a guy by the
name of gnome sobel who's at the
weizmann institute he used to be at
berkeley he has a lab over in israel his
amazing lab works on olfaction
smell and they discovered that the scent
of women's tears causes a dramatic and
significant reduction in testosterone in
men what absolutely and this was
published if anyone wants to go look it
up it was published in science magazine
you know you can smell tears yeah we
have you know the super bowl of
publishing and science is science nature
and self those are the three top
journals this is published in science
magazine very stringent uh the smell of
tears now it's subconscious at some
level
but the other thing that if we were
going to kind of play around in this
hormones and behave interactions between
humans um there are some really
interesting examples so for instance
men
will rate the smell of a woman's skin or
sweat or the perception of her face as
more beautiful during the pre-ovulatory
phase of her menstrual cycle
that pre-ovulatory phase is associated
with a number of different changes in
hormones okay
just that smell will increase
testosterone in a male
oral contraception in the female
women taking oral contraception it
adjusts their hormones such that men no
longer detect this change in
how attractive women are doesn't mean
they find them unattractive but it means
they don't find them increasingly
interactive during this certain period
of the of their of their menstrual cycle
so we are constantly signaling back and
forth through hormones in fact we met
over there
and shook hands because we've been
tested for covet and the rest we shook
hands and
what happened and what happens within 30
seconds of any human being contacting
one another is they shake hands and then
they wipe their the chemicals of the
other person on their face
gnome's lab has also shown this and so
we are constantly signaling through
through chemical exchange sometimes it's
subconscious and those are the so-called
pheromone effects sometimes it's low
levels of odors that are beneath our
conscious detection and sometimes it's
outright wow this person smells really
really good or they look particularly
good today oftentimes that's tied to the
of the period in which they are
ovulating in their menstrual cycle so i
want to plant a flag here about all the
things that we do
that are
messing with these mechanisms like
cologne or deodorant or oral
contraception of which i'm not saying is
pornography like all interception has
served a great role in it for certain
people some people might say was this an
ethical discussion or is it good is it
bad but um either way it is having an
effect right so to remove i only look at
things through the lens of biology not
through the lens of of whether or not we
should or shouldn't do things i love it
okay so we're planning that we're coming
back to it but now i want to get to how
do we spike intentionally you've talked
about we can spike testosterone but i
want to know can we spike dopamine
yeah so um and you've done this so your
example of
craving is
actually what you crave you crave the
feeling of craving is beautiful because
it would what it means is that you don't
allow yourself to go so far down the arc
of the dopamine trajectory to get to the
other source of motivation so there are
two sources of motivation as it relates
to dopamine and then we can think about
tools that we could export from these
that are nested in neurobiology
the first is to do what you do
which is to be able to sense the craving
as its own form of pleasure this has
kind of remnants of carol dweck's growth
mindset that you eventually develop a
pleasure in the seeking and the striving
has you know uh has flavors of a david
goggins type approach where where it
seems like he gets pleasure from the
friction itself and so there are
elements of that you seem to have that
as well
but
if you can start to identify the craving
as its own internally released drug this
thing dopamine that is a source of
motivation then what you realize is that
capturing the reward is wonderful
but attaching dopamine to the reward is
actually a little bit dangerous
attaching yeah this is celebrating the
win celebrating the win more than the
pursuit it actually sets you up for
failure in the future and so this gets
us right into something called dopamine
reward prediction error and reward
prediction error is basically if you
expect something to be really great
and then it's not quite that great your
dopamine baseline lowers and now
understanding what we know about
dopamine that means that not only did
you you feel as if you lost because it
wasn't as much a celebration as you
thought it would be but it also means
that you're starting from a lower place
meaning you are less motivated now the
simpler way to conceptualize this is
have a colleague at stanford she runs
the addiction dual diagnosis clinic at
uh her name is dr anna lemke she has a
book called dopamine nation that's out
right now
and she's really described as pleasure
pain balance where anytime you have a
bunch of dopamine and you're in pursuit
pursuit pursuit
after you achieve a win now this could
be a business win a relationship a win
of any kind
but
inevitably there's going to be a tipping
back of the scale on the pain side and
that pain side is always going to go a
little bit higher than the dopamine side
so this is what you would feel if you
pursued a goal like building a big
company
here it comes here comes the big sale
and then there's the well what now the
kind of letdown now if you wait if you
simply wait and stop pursuing dopamine
for a short while the scale starts to
reset
the problem is a lot of people
immediately roll right into the next
pursuit
and then what happens is that scale
starts to get stuck on the pain side a
little bit more a little bit more a
little bit more and pretty soon no
amount of seeking will allow you to
experience that craving and motivation
so what what does this mean in terms of
an actual tool well first of all
if people can do what you do they're
going to be in a much better position in
life it doesn't matter if it's school
sport relationship any domain of life if
you can start to register ah that
craving and that friction and that
desire that almost kind of low level of
agitation sometimes high level of
agitation that is that i'm trying to
impose my will on the world in a
benevolent way we hope
that's dopamine it's working with its
close cousin which is epinephrine which
is adrenaline they are very close
cousins in fact dopamine manufactures
epinephrine a lot of people don't know
this but adrenaline is actually made
from the molecule dopamine
okay so those two are hanging out
together it's like crave work crave work
craving work craving work craving work
and then you get the win
and some people
allow the big peak in dopamine to be
associated with the win
and
smart people
learn to adjust their celebration
internally right this is all internal
you could throw the biggest party in the
world but as long as you're kind of in
laid back
and
looking at this not letting yourself get
manic crazy
you won't necessarily crash as hard
and pretty soon your system will reset
so you take the day you clean up the
dishes you relax you go what now i'm
feeling a little low well rather than
going out and spiking your dopamine
again just wait understand that the
scale will reset again give yourself a
few days where you're going to feel a
little kind of underwhelmed things
aren't going to be as interesting
it's going to be hard to trigger that
big release because you just had
the peak
well if you adjust that you relax you
understand there's always a little bit
of a postpartum depression
we sometimes hear about postpartum
depression that's a clinical thing but
there's always that kind of today's not
as exciting
as the previous days what am i going to
do with my life but then
if you let it start ratcheting up again
then what you realize is your capacity
to tap into dopamine as a motivator not
just seeking dopamine rewards that is
infinite and i i can say with with great
certainty that this is
how you were able to build a big company
and sell it how you've been able to
build a successful podcast and sell it
how you constantly seeking because
seeking is the reward and i think for
most people we think of the reward as
the finish line and so the key is to get
to the finish line step into the end
zone but no end zone dance it's just
like yep and now i'm gonna go do it
again
that's really the key that's that's the
key to doing it over and over and when i
see big athletes or
academics or anyone or musicians and
they
rise and crash
it's clear they've lost the touch with
the motivation evoked dopamine and
they've lost touch probably because it
hasn't really been described by the
neuroscience community until anna has
started talking about this stuff
publicly and i'm just kind of echoing
what she's beautifully said
said much better than i am which is that
you should always expect that after a
bunch of pleasure there's going to be
that low and then that craving how do i
get back to there again and the key is
you have to walk the staircase again you
don't get to do this as a square wave
pull you know you don't get to just
ascend ascend ascend it's always up
down
up a little bit higher down up you know
it's that's the function
so um i don't know if that resonates
with your experience i'm over here
freaking out so you've literally just
explained what i will say is the single
most important loop if you want to be
successful
and you used words
attach right you had another one which
was about your t i forget the exact word
but you're taking you're inserting
yourself consciously into the process
because what i learned very early on and
i'm so grateful in the same way that you
are grateful that your upbringing wasn't
perfect but it ended up giving you a
frame of reference and insights that
have propelled you forward i'm very
grateful that i spent a decade just
trying to get rich that was the stated
mission i would say it every day like
i'm here to get rich i show up to work
to get rich it's about getting rich rich
rich rich and it didn't work
and so and my wife pulls me aside and
she's like you're now damaging the
marriage like you're just so fiendishly
focused on the goal
that there's nothing as integrated in
your life you're doing something you
hate for an end state that may never
come
and that was so profound and it shook me
so deeply and it suddenly became clear
that from a neurological perspective
what i wanted was to feel alive and once
i put everything in the pursuit i'm just
interested in can i show up every day
and sincerely pursue this thing which i
may never get but i'm gonna honor myself
celebrate myself big up myself as the
brits would say for just showing up
today and actually trying to make it
happen
and one that's way more sustainable and
then two you don't
you don't get tricked into thinking that
oh when i get this thing that i'll feel
good because it's the craving that makes
me feel alive so it's the state of
wanting that is in and of itself the
pleasurable act that's right and so
i began to use the metaphor of i'm gonna
climb this mountain only to want the
next mountain to climb and once i knew
that well then you have to be totally
comfortable dropping back down and
starting all over now the interesting
thing and i don't know if i'm fooling
myself or if i have
so integrated that trick
but the come down isn't hard for me so
i i think my last day at quest was a
monday
and tuesday i started impact theory and
so that went from i had 3 000 employees
your position matters you get a lot of
deference uh you've got a privileged
parking space you know what i mean like
there's there's a lot of things that go
into it and
but i didn't none of like my reward
system was tied to that so it was very
easy for me to start the next day with
there was only seven of us and no one
had time for any deference of any kind
and i went from having an ea which you
can't imagine how amazing that is to not
and you're doing everything for yourself
again
but that wasn't a painful thing because
i was so focused on all right cool this
is step one again and now can can we
repeat well it helps if you can expect
that there will be a little bit of a dip
post win or post
whatever um that's helpful there's
always a refractory period of any kind
so to speak if you expect it that's
great because you eliminate the the
downside of the reward prediction error
reward prediction error can also be
conceptualized as i tell you we're going
to go this restaurant i keep building up
the food building up the food i actually
raised the expectation and the
requirement that that food be really
spectacular better off i just tell you
it's gonna be pretty good and then
you're wowed by it right because if your
dopamine was higher in anticipation than
the actual food evoked well then it
makes sense why would you're always
integrating over the dopamine release
you had previously
now there are a couple things that you
said in there that i want to highlight
which i find so interesting uh and we
can get a little bit
eastern philosophy mystical here but tie
it back to some real neuroscience which
is you said you know that's the juice
the motivation is the juice you know
that
if you look at eastern philosophy and
they talk about qi you know in this you
know what is that i i wager that is
dopamine the desire to pursue things and
to create more of oneself and
as a species whether or not you decide
to have kids or not those circuits all
use the one universal currency dopamine
of wanting more things that are outside
the confines of your skin and that's
what's driven forward evolution of
individuals and
families and cultures and our our
species as a whole and again the
circuitry has been there for many many
tens if not hundreds of thousands of
years
and so it's and it's highly conserved
and so what that means is that it
doesn't matter if it's bitcoin or
ethereum it doesn't matter if it's
putting rockets on other planets it
doesn't matter if it's building the
first automobile it's the same currency
so understanding those cycles is really
key the other thing is the element of
pain i think that understanding that
pain and pleasure and this really
dynamic balance
can also help us which in the following
way
any pain that you feel the longer day
the less sleep the the kind of agony
that things aren't working that power
outlet doesn't work or the internet is
slow whatever it is
the amount of pleasure that you will
eventually experience
is directly relation related excuse me
to how much pain you experience so we
know this from actually what nowadays
would be considered quite barbaric and
unethical experiments where they would
give people electrical shocks
and they would measure their response
and then they'd say we're going to
increase it we're going to increase it
eventually they get to the point where a
slight shock that was previously very
painful actually evokes a sense of
pleasure
now you couldn't do these experiments
anymore these are not the experiments i
do in my lab
these are older experiments but
for instance and this has been discussed
in scientific research papers uh giving
somebody a like a 10-minute ice bath for
instance or even a three-minute ice bath
or a one-minute ice bath it's quite
painful but there was a study from the
university of prague uh european journal
physiology showed that after a painful
ice bath stimulus
the amount of dopamine release goes up
for two and a half hours to 250 percent
above baseline and that's not because
the ice bath
itself evokes dopamine release a lot of
people think oh cold water of ox
dopamine release no pain evokes dopamine
release after the pain is over yesterday
i tweaked my back because i do this
stupid thing every few years the same
stupid thing and it's really painful and
then you just remember all the ways in
which you can't move around i was like
standing up this morning like ah and
just walking is so painful as the pain
has started to dissipate you get a
little bit of a high right you get a
little bit of a euphoria that's dopamine
because of the the degree of pain you
experienced previously predicts how much
pleasure so when you start a company
down in the dregs and you're shoveling
again
that's beautiful because that means that
the wind that you achieve
is going to be as good or greater than
the one you had previously in your case
with quest and so we go back to this
example the person that's not motivated
that can't get off the couch that
doesn't want to do anything well this is
the problem we remember the rad
experiment they are effectively the rat
with no dopamine but they can still
achieve
some sense of pleasure
by consuming excess calories by
consuming social media and look i'm not
judging i do this stuff too right
scrolling social media if you've ever
scrolled social media and you're like i
don't even know why i'm doing this it
doesn't really feel that good
and i can remember a time where you'd
see something it was just so cool or you
see something online i remember this
when ted talks first came out i was like
this is amazing these are some at least
some of them are really smart people
sharing really cool insights and then
now that they're like a gazillion ted
talks i remember spending a winter in my
office at when i was a junior professor
cleaning my office finally
and binging ted talks in the background
thinking this is a good use of my time
pretty soon they all sucked to me i was
like this isn't good so what you need to
do is stop watching dead docs for a
while
wait and then they become interesting
again and that's this pain pleasure
balance
and so for people that aren't feeling
motivated the problem is they're not
motivated but they're getting just
enough or excess sustenance so they're
getting the little mild hits of opioid
it becomes an opioid system and if you
think about the opioid drugs as opposed
to dopamine dopaminergic drugs
dopaminergic drugs make people rabid for
everything you know drugs of abuse like
cocaine amphetamine make people
incredibly outward directed or they
hardly notice anything except what they
want more of more more it's very
it's bad
because those drugs trigger so much
dopamine release that they become the
reward it's very circular that only the
drug can give that much dopamine nothing
they could pursue would give them as
much dopamine as the drug itself
so there's that and then there's the
kind of opioid like effects
of constantly indulging oneself with
social media or with video games or with
with food or with anything to the point
where it no longer evokes the motivation
and craving and this is really the new
evolution of the understanding of
dopamine and neuro in neuroscience which
is that dopamine itself is not the
reward it's the build-up to the reward
and the reward has more of a kind of
opioid bliss-like property which itself
is not bad if it's endogenous released
from within but when we can just sit
there like the like the rat with no
dopamine gorging ourselves with
pleasures so to speak what you end up
with is somebody that feels really
unmotivated and those pleasures no
longer work to tickle those feel-good
circuits and so there's no reason for
them to go out and pursue anything and
that's a pretty dark picture so the the
keys are
to pursue rewards but understand that
the pursuit is actually the reward
if you want to have repeated
wins okay you the celebration has to be
less than the pursuit and that's hard
for some people to do
they you know they it's got to be that
your celebration is slightly less
dopaminergic
it can be very reflective you can be in
gratitude those are other
neurotransmitter systems but you don't
want to be on that high as you celebrate
the wind
you want to be
trickling out your dopamine
regularly until you pursue things and
then just understand there will always
be a crash of pain and the more pain you
experience the more dopamine you can
achieve if you get back on the avenue of
perfect yeah this gets into unintended
consequences of modernity and so we're
living through this time where we you
know going back to that flag that we
planted of these unintended consequences
of oh i can make myself smell good oh i
can you know watch the coolest video oh
like tick tock
dude i don't have an addictive
personality that's the first thing where
i'll lose an hour and be like what the
[__] did i just do well that's
the problem is not pleasures the problem
is that pleasure experienced without
prior requirement for pursuit yes
is
terrible for us it's terrible for us as
individuals it's terrible for us as as
groups and i have great confidence in
the human species to work this out but
we are finding now and we are going to
increasingly find that those who will be
successful young or old are going to be
those people who can create their own
internal buffers they're going to be
able to control their relationship to
pleasures because the proximity to
pleasures and their availability is the
problem if you look at
the increase in
use of drugs of abuse or prescription
medication which at least at the first
pass deliver pleasure pain relief the
whole issue with the opioid crisis and
and dopaminergic drugs like ritalin
adderall
you know there is sometimes there's a
clinical need but tons of people are
taking those recreationally now or to
study huge dopamine increases are what
those cause
that is a problem that's a serious
problem because it creates a cycle where
you you need more of that specific thing
i always say addiction
is a progressive narrowing of the things
that bring you pleasure that's such a
good difference and you know and i don't
like to comment too much on
enlightenment because you know i don't
really know what that is as a
neurobiologist but a good life we could
say is a progressive expansion of the
things that bring you pleasure and even
better is a good life is a progressive
expansion of the things that bring you
pleasure and includes pleasure through
motivation and hard work and
understanding this pain pleasure balance
whereby if you experience pain and you
can continue to be in that friction and
exert effort
the rewards are that much greater when
they arrive
and so
i think that if you look at any drug of
abuse or any situation where somebody
isn't motivated or thinks that now they
may have clinically diagnosed attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder but a lot
of what people think is adhd it turns
out is people just over consuming
dopamine from various sources and then
and also the context within a tick tock
feed is the context switch is insane the
brain has never seen first of all
there's a first time in human evolution
that we wrote with our thumbs but that's
a pretty benign shift and that the other
shift is
normally you walk from one room to
another or from a field into the trees
or from a hut into or a house or
whatever it is but now you can get 10
000 context switches in that 30 minutes
of scrolling on instagram or to talk and
so it's all about self-regulation we are
going to select for the people that can
self-regulate and
so then people say well how do you
self-regulate how do kids self-regulate
well this is my hope and one of the
reasons i've gotten excited about public
education and teaching neuroscience is
that
this is a place where knowledge of
knowledge actually can allow oneself to
intervene when you think i'm feeling low
i don't feel good nothing really feels
like am i depressed maybe but maybe
you're just you've saturated the
dopamine circuits you're now in the pain
part of things what do you do well you
have to stop you need you need to
replenish dopamine you need to stop
engaging with this behavior and then
your pleasure for it will come back but
you have to constantly control the hinge
it's not just about being back and forth
on the seesaw you have to make sure the
hinge doesn't get stuck in pain or in
pleasure so it's a dynamic process being
a human being it's not easy and remember
these circuits didn't evolve for this
purpose
they evolve primarily for
making more of ourselves that's why
they're so closely tied to the
reproductive circuits and that's why it
was interesting and very relevant that
you said that your
desire to have sex with your wife is one
of the most powerful feelings and it
kind of as a from a neurochemical
perspective it wicks out into all these
other pursuits right those other
pursuits aren't about sex per se but
it's the same molecules so the feeling
is the same it's just that some people
for some people the amplitude of that
dopamine signal for craving sex is very
high for some people that's lower and
it's higher for um video games you know
whatever you lean into
and and you
think about often
in these pursuits we'll start to reshape
these circuits because these
dopaminergic circuits are tied to
everything you know there are examples
of people getting addicted to the most
incredible things they're also examples
of people getting very good but not
addicted to chess for instance it's all
the same
general set of mechanisms
yeah you talked earlier about
the the knowledge of knowledge and that
was the big breakthrough for me at the
darkest period of my life i happened to
grab a book we talked about this briefly
in our first interview i happened to
grab a book that talked about
neuroplasticity and they were
hypothesizing maybe this is a thing
and
that
gave me hope because i could imagine
what was going on in my brain and once i
can visualize it then i feel like i can
insert myself into it it's why i've
gotten so interested in health why i'm
so interested in neuroscience
is for me if i were sliding towards
depression i would do exactly what
you're saying i would assess that and be
like okay wait a second i know that i
can insert conscious control i know that
this is a
biological experience and i'm i'm
obsessed with that idea that you're
having a biological experience and to me
like there's some people that see the
way the magic trick is done and it loses
the magic then for other people it's
like you see that it's this is somebody
that's spent 30 000 hours learning how
to move their hands so that you don't
notice that they just move the coin you
know from this hand to this hand it's
it blows me away i love magic uh before
the pandemic a friend took me up to the
magic castle here in hollywood and
there's some incredible stuff going on
magic is actually really cool we could
uh just as a from a neuroscience
perspective magic it's all about
creating gaps in your perception that's
obvious right
and when that happens because the the
brain is so accustomed to the laws of
physics like objects fall down not up
etc when that happens it clearly
triggers the surprise circuitry and that
itself that feeling of delight and
surprise is absolutely tied also to
these dopamine dopamine circuits it's
interesting though that that doesn't
send us into like terror like the people
depends on the magic trick when i went
there there was this crazy trick that
the guy did he took out cards and i was
invited up to sit next to him i signed
my name on a card
i took the card i took the card
i tore it up i put it in my pocket
and at the end of the show we went
through a series of things at the end of
the show he
took off his shoe and presented the card
to me with the signature intact and the
card intact and that was my signature
so he clearly created gaps of perception
um but at some point as adults so i
think as long as we know the context is
right then we can we can do this one
thing about dopamine that i just want to
make sure i
uh mention and it based on something you
said earlier is that
one interesting question about the brain
is just asking the question you know how
do we segment time how do we how do you
know that this podcast has obviously has
a beginning in the middle and an end but
you know how do we segment time and so
there have been some beautiful
experiments done recently showing that
uh for instance if you're watching a
sports game regardless of whether or not
your team scores like let's say
basketball goes down court let's say
they missed the three-pointer and then
you know it's a close game there's a
little blip of dopamine that says that
was one segment of time
and so dopamine is a big way in which we
segment time the other way are blinks
believe it or not
yeah that every time we blink there's a
paper publishing current biology every
time we blink we reset our perception of
that when i understand more i guess than
the dopamine why would dopamine be
involved in time perfect question turns
out that the frequency of blinking is
set by the level baseline level of
dopamine in the brain yes so when people
are wide-eyed with excitement and
they're and they're just they're not
blinking very often or someone is on a
drug that kicks out a lot of dopamine
they hardly ever blink their pupils are
huge
they're they're actually not segmenting
time in the normal fashion
and so much of your life in retrospect
is segmented by those peaks and dopamine
they those mark key events in your life
when you met your wife uh that their
their
all the segments of your life are are
noted by peaks and dopamine or the way
that you happen to conceptualize
dopamine and so also people who are
depressed are often very focused on the
past they ruin naturally they default to
ruminating on the past when you adjust
people's dopamine levels to healthy
levels they start becoming more forward
thinking and more present and so there's
this relationship between blinking and
time perception dopamine and blinking
how you conceptualize time has a lot to
do with these peaks and dopamine and
when they occur
and this is a big deal because we're you
know 2020 was a rough year for most
people 2021's feeling a little better
but we don't really know where we are in
this whole arc of everything that's
happening
there's a lot of uncertainty yeah
the dopamine peaks and the frequency of
those dopamine peaks have everything to
do with how we carve up our experience
of time and anyone who spent a lot of
time in deep meditation
starts to develop a kind of intuitive
internal representation of the fact that
time is very fluid in this way when we
say time is fluid what we mean is the
secretion of dopamine and these pulses
is very fluid they are under control of
our of what's happening externally but
also how you conceptualize your life
like where are you in your life are you
you know hopefully we'll if david
sinclair has his way and hopefully he
will we will all live to be you know
more than a hundred years old
hopefully in good vitality so this is
the more esoteric aspect of dopamine
real fast before we go about the time
thing yeah let me ask you so there was a
period in my life i'll take it at about
two years where for whatever reason i it
could have been six hours since i last
looked at a clock i would be within
three minutes of what time it was and my
wife found it hilarious and so she'd be
like what time is it and i'm like oh
it's 4 58.
it was so weird that it like made my
radar is like oh my god i have like this
special power and then it went away
and now i can probably get you within 15
minutes but like uh it was really eerie
is is there does that make a prediction
or a round like
a consistency of dopamine release or
something yeah you nailed it it's the
consistency that's an internal it's an
interval timer as we say so when
people's dopamine is low they tend to
overestimate okay okay
and when people's dopamine is high they
tend to underestimate time now it is
true that dopamine when it's released is
a little bit of a stimulant in the
system because of the way it works with
epinephrine how finely you slice time is
very dependent on dopamine and your
internal level of autonomic arousal a
really good example would be you're
really excited about something or you're
really stressed about something doesn't
matter dopamine is
elevated in excitement but
norepinephrine epinephrine tend to be
elevated any time we're agitated or or
excited
just imagine you need to catch a flight
you're in line at the security and the
person in front of you seems like
they're going really really slowly your
frame rate is faster you're just carving
up time more finely people are in car
accidents and then they report
everything being in slow motion your
frame rate is is
smaller you're essentially getting
you're taking larger time bins and this
is why let's say you wake up and you're
really tired or you're just you're kind
of out of it and you look and it's like
text messages and emails and all this
stuff the world seems like it's going by
really really fast
dopamine is what is the diagno is the
dynamic process by dopamine release i
should say is the dynamic process by
which you adjust time perception so if
you had a very keen perception of the
passage of time right down to the minute
or so that suggests very regular
intervals of dopamine release and that's
probably tied to outside events that are
below your conscious awareness
but
uh dopamine releases i i sort of
not to make this uh pg-13 or r-rated but
if we go back to the example of sex sex
and sleep are the two times when space
and time have a very fluid type
relationship it's very
hard to conceive space and time in sleep
that's actually the nature of sleep is
we do the long blink no joke we close
the shutters stop bringing in external
information and in sleep space and time
are very
fluid right things can happen very fast
or very slow slow motion you can be
flying it there's a lot of you know some
of it is dreaming but space and time are
very fluid in wakefulness
space and time are very anchored by
physical events in the world but our
perception of those is dynamically
regulated by how much dopamine is in our
system so it's beginning to sound like
dopamine does everything but it's really
associated with motivation craving and
time interval keeping and so i would be
willing to bet that your pulses of
dopamine were very regular just like
drops
so interesting so we do a lot of things
who knows what i was doing at that
period if it had to do anything just
that i'm getting older and so it starts
to disrupt itself who knows but
what are some things so one thing i've
heard you talk about which i find really
interesting
when i think about all the things that
we're doing that are disrupting things
all these unintended consequences of
modern behavior
i am truly glad that
cell phones the internet and pornography
did not exist when i was younger because
i don't know if at 14
i could have been disciplined enough if
i had access to that and
what like when you think about the
things that we're doing right now that
are sort of the that have maybe the most
grand unintended consequences where do
you land
yeah on the time scale of 24 hours one
of the the huge mistakes that we all
make and i'm i've said this many times
so if people have heard me say this
before forgive me but it turns out it's
still true
uh
getting too much bright light exposure
from the hours of 10 pm until 4 am
unless you have to work shift work which
is a unique case
that bright light exposure between 10 pm
and 4 am even if you
adjust the colors of the lights you
still need to get everything really
really dim because it actually
blocks the release of dopamine through a
pathway that involves a structure called
the habenula
the habenula was a kind of cryptic
structure in the brain for a long time
but now we know there's a punishment
signal in the brain you get
neurochemically punished
for viewing bright light at those hours
how how would that be wired in we'd
never be able to expose ourselves to
bright light ah so that's a great
question so firelight won't do that
moonlight's fine candles lights that are
dim are now in your environment
so the the pathway to the habenula and
then to these dopamine reducing circuits
are the pain pathway that we're
referring to earlier it's a generic
pathway through which lots of different
types of signals and stimuli and events
can punish us internally this is so good
dude and so i'm going to call this the
rich kid effect
like there and you mentioned hard work
earlier there is a reason i think that
children of wealthy parents end up
imploding because there is a an
evolutionary the punishment pathway
evolutionary thing that's going on that
says you didn't have to work hard for
the things that you own and because from
uh i need you to go hunt and gather and
face a saber-toothed tiger i have to
reward you for doing hard things and
punish you for not doing hard things
well and
you know in the case of the the
the generic model of the of the spoiled
rich kid it they actually can't access
dopamine uh remember that that a movie
from the 80s it was a uh it was called
like the toy or something with richard i
was like if this [__] says toy
i'm gonna have a seizure yes
richard pryor in that movie and the kid
has everything and he's the he's the
epitome of the spoiled brat all the toys
all the cars all the things now we see
this with people who actually go from
rags to riches and then bathe in all
their the luxuries they didn't have as a
child these are often the athletes that
don't go on to perform well again
these are people that crash because of
other dopamine-seeking behaviors you
know i'm not going to call out names but
there are far too many examples of these
and i don't call out names mostly
because we are all capable of this we
all would like to think that oh if i had
all that money or if i had all that
success i would really be a good human
being and i wouldn't do those things
anyone any human being that is immersed
in these dopamine circuits too much or
who gets too much pleasure without
having to pursue it first and really
work and
actually experience pain pleasure
ratcheting back and forth along that
climb because it wasn't just dopamine
like this for you it's probably pain
pleasure pain pleasure pain
pleasure pain right they're always
proportional to one another
so anyone that does that it has a
tremendously hard time accessing
pleasure
they can't do that and and we often
think about the extremes of addiction
and those are really severe but we also
have to think about the more subtle
forms of something we really love but
indulging in it just a little too often
so that it no longer has that edge
you know there have been really good
studies of people who jump out of
airplanes with parachutes you know
i'm sure it's a lot of fun it looks like
a thrill but people do over and over and
over again
often die
doing other things they often become
drug addicts because it's a huge high oh
yeah yeah a lot of that
and you know there are a lot of examples
of this i mean you can get addicted to
anything the key is to regulate that
behavior so you asked what
you know what should people do well
certainly
i'm trying this now and i have some good
examples some young people i know and
work with are taking breaks from not
just social media but no cell phone
whatsoever i'm actually trying an odd
experiment which is
for the first hour of every day no phone
mostly because part of your 25 no-gos
yes
right so we have circuitry in the brain
related to the so-called basal ganglia
and we have go sort of activating you
know think gas pedal and then we there's
a lot of no go circuitry
and
learning how to keep that no go don't
circuitry as we could call it
uh tuned up is very important and so
many times throughout the day but i try
and get 25 a day where i actively
refrain from doing something that i
impulsively want to do could be looking
at my phone but it could even be
something trivial like i want to walk to
the kitchen and get a glass of water so
i'm actively engaging in
self-den
in denial not cognitive denial probably
that too but how would i know um but in
action-based denial so restricting my
behavior in some way as a way of keeping
these dopamine circuits tuned up also
not looking at my phone first thing in
the morning for an hour because
knowing what we now know about the
second phase of sleep and rem sleep
being more predominant the second wave
of sleep and the fact that you're
working through a lot of emotional and
logistical contingencies you're
reshaping your brain in sleep that's
when neuroplasticity occurs during sleep
it's triggered in wakefulness but it
actually takes place in sleep especially
that second half of sleep
when you wake up in the morning you are
in a perfect position to what i call
receive the download of all the work
that your neural circuitry has been
doing the night before but if you
immediately go to a sensory experience
especially a rich sensory experience of
stuff scrolling by you're actually
missing the information that you
processed at night and even more
importantly that second half of the
night during rem sleep is when the
emotional weight of things start becomes
let's say
you put it on the shelf properly things
that are important to emotional
emotionally registered get put in one
shelf things that were like the comment
you got on twitter that was triggering
doesn't seem like such a big deal after
a good night's sleep and that's because
that second half of sleep is actually
when you re-experience these things but
your body can't secrete adrenaline it's
kind of an internal form of therapy or
even trauma therapy and that's why
people who don't get that sleep are very
you know they're easily agitated they
feel like the world is crushing down on
them so when i wake up in the morning i
want to receive ideas that i want to
learn from my learning and if you take
in new information you are not in a
position to do that and 60 minutes is a
tough one so i give myself two no-gos
for the 60-minute block if i can do it
and i'll tell you a lot of mornings i
fail tom i don't do it interesting i
just i found that shocking but i heard
you say that in another interview and i
was like well i mean i'm human you know
there are mornings where
um i get enticed or worse
worse i find myself reflexively picking
up without having made the conscious
decision and that's when
i realized that
you know we are all
deep in this process and i think
uh we have to regulate it the the
experiment i'd like to do maybe you'll
do this with me as a challenge because
the challenge is always good is in the
new year i actually want to take every
odd waking hour of the day off the phone
so even hours of the day
as long as it's waking i'm willing to
have it on and work with it but odd
hours just turn it off no matter what
i don't know if this will destroy most
of the relationships
but just to see can i do it on a rigidly
externally imposed schedule because if
you think about most of the growth in
life comes from these rigidly externally
imposed schedules and we hate them
but they are where we learn restraint
dude this is so important i don't know
if i hate them anymore so people will
often ask like how i do this that or the
other whatever it is like tom how do you
um
so i work 93 hours a week that's like my
average that's your average so
tom why do you work 93 hours every week
and the answer is because 93 are joyful
and 94 wouldn't
and
when i start working more than that it
usually means that i'm juggling so many
things that my brain seems to be using
sleep as a way to track some of them or
something yeah so i find myself waking
up a lot no i have a trick that allows
me to fall back asleep very fast but
it's still not as restful as just
sleeping through the night what's the
trick if you don't mind me entering i
don't at all so i have two pairs of
airpod headphones
and i put them in
and i put them on a uh
fiction book and i turn the volume down
such that if i don't put a little bit of
pressure on my ear i can't make out what
they're saying so as soon as i drift off
the pressure releases and i can still
hear that noise is being made but i
can't track it and so i'm usually out
probably in about three minutes wow that
that changed my life in terms of when i
get stressed i can still fall back
asleep such a great skill and just
reflecting on what you use
that murmur in the background and this
kind of low level i can't quite detect
it is actually the way that your brain
detects things as you're falling asleep
so i wonder if you've triggered your
circuit to run in reverse where you
actually can send yourself back under
what what it makes me think is that i
can't
process the problems
and listen to a story at the same time
and so my brain clicks over into story
mode and it's like oh we're digesting
this story i i'm getting input so
because i'm getting input because it's
story my brain lets go of i have to
solve problems and then that allows me
to fall right back asleep that's great
such a great skill and waking up in the
middle of the night from time to time to
use the bathroom is actually quite
normal
and some people are really obsessed by
the fact oh no i woke up and then they
get triggered but i learned this last
year um
that the
peak in our alertness is actually about
90 minutes before our natural bedtime
and a lot of people they you know they
reach the point in the evening where
they're
ready to go to sleep and then they feel
all this you know excitement and surge
of energy and they think oh no i'm not
going to be able to fall asleep but
that's actually a natural surge that's
followed by a dip a lot of people also
have the trouble of waking up in the
middle of the night and wondering why
they can't fall back asleep this is
dreadfully hard for a lot of people i
struggled that for years yeah and one of
the solutions is to go to bed earlier
because it means that your melatonin is
starting to get released early in the
evening and so we all have the natural
ability to push to stay late stay up
later if we really need to this has
obvious adaptive utility but some people
by who should go to bed quote unquote
should go to bed at 9 or 10 p.m they're
pushing to 11 or 12 and then their
melatonin signal is starting to drop off
now they can't fall asleep
or they're waking up at two or three in
the morning and they're they're in
trouble but it sounds like you've hit
the right schedule 93 hours is an
impressive output
that's a lot of years of making an
obscene amount of mistakes and to close
the loop on so people how do you
accomplish xyz and the answer is partly
rules
so you have to be obsessed with your
goal right so for me that's all
obsessions start with a goal what do you
want is that thing exciting and
honorable assuming it's exciting and
honorable there's ways to like create
feedback loops which is largely what
we've been talking about today about
attaching the dopaminergic response
specifically to the pursuit of that
thing rather than having it
and
by
to because i'm so excited and because i
so believe in the reality of my goals
that i actually could have them and that
having them would be awesome
i can create rules in my life and then i
really stick to those rules so once i'm
very careful about what rules i put in
place because i have to believe that
they will actually lead me to this goal
that's really exciting for me but if i
believe it then i can put them in and
then also part of my identity is that
i'm the type of person that when i set a
rule i follow it so i can create this
loop of like feeling good about myself
and the thing that i'm pursuing but it
really works and i'm shocked how few
people have the kind of rule that you're
talking about in the new year to say hey
i'm only going to do odd hours there's
no phone yeah well and like i said i'm
not perfect i'm not as disciplined as
you are about my no goes i try i
actually find that tabulating is is kind
of fun
um it's also fun to get really
triggering comments
and and to not close the dopamine loop
for them i think if people understood um
the dopamine reward prediction error
that we could end all the um
amplifying comment battles online
because what happens is if someone takes
a a jab at you of any kind there's
actually an open dopamine loop waiting
for you to respond and any response
actually gives them that that dopamine
response of success it's a little bit of
a it's like scoring a three-pointer and
the no response actually drops their
dopamine below baseline and that's its
own form of retaliation and i have to be
careful because i don't want to
encourage people to retaliate but any
anything that short-circuits the kind of
madness of getting pulled into
some online battle that's totally
meaningless it's taking people away from
other powerful good things that they
could do in the world
you know we've been talking mainly about
dopamine and its scheduling and about
the fact that it can be attached to
anything i think
many people find it hard to subjectively
attach dopamine to something they don't
want to do this is something that uh if
we'd spoken a year ago i would've i my
answer would have been a little bit
different to the question of how do you
get motivated well one way to do that is
if you are good at subjectively
attaching
dopamine to the pursuit just knowing
okay i really am hungry for this i'm
just i'm going to tell myself that you
know making you know making it one
percent of the way
is a success and i'm going to keep going
and i'm going to keep ratcheting on and
that's great if you can do that but for
people that can't do that understanding
this relationship with a pleasure pain
balance can be more powerful just
understanding the more friction and pain
that you experience the greater the
dopamine reward you will get later and
that serves as its own amplifier of the
whole process of pursuing more dopamine
and then the other aspect of it
is that any time that we're leaning into
action
you know it has the
possibility of being an amplifying
process or a depleting process
and the key to that is making sure that
you're balancing the dopamine and
epinephrine systems you know epinephrine
being this molecule of universal
currency of energy output it could be
out of hate or it could be out of love
epinephrine doesn't care and actually
dopamine doesn't care none of these
systems care about us they just
work underneath our underneath our
conscious control but when you start to
understand that
hitting the gas pedal is great but
hitting the gas pedal and then coming
off the gas pedal a little bit
you can kind of sit in a more relaxed
rpm actually allows you to go much
further i think that people
leaning into action is terrific i always
say you can either be back on your heels
flat footed or forward center of mass
the best situation is actually to be
right upright but just know that you can
be forward center of mass at any point
and you know that to take it back to sex
and reproduction because it's a salient
example the arc of of sex is very
interesting because when you think about
autonomic arousal it turns out that the
the arousal stage of sex actually
involves release of dopamine
but is what we call parasympathetic
dominant it's actually has to be relaxed
enough
in order to occur okay everyone can read
between the lines on this
orgasm is actually
a
i want to say full blown it's a it's a
it is a sympathetic
nervous system driven response it's
identical to the stress system it's
driven by the same neural circuits as
stress
and then what comes afterward
the parasympathetic system goes back up
again it's that deep relaxation so why
do i say this not to talk about sex to
be
you know to to serve as a highlighter
but rather our species arrived here
because of this dance between arousal
and relaxation arousal and relaxation
and one thing we can say for sure about
every human being that's alive now is
that their parents at least once
mastered this dance of relaxed but not
and excited but not too excited then
really excited and then relaxed that
dance was mastered by all of our parents
and that's what delivered us here to
some extent and so i
what this means is that all the neural
circuits from the ones that led to our
conception to the ones that lead to us
pursuing goals have this
balance that's almost like a like a
seesaw right there's activation and calm
activation and calm and it's that
dynamic process that's important to
master in every endeavor so we use sex
as an example but in pursuit of goals
you have to learn how to pursue
short-term goals
and like the goals within the day make a
cup of coffee and goal and long-term
goals and when i said dopamine is what's
setting the
your time perception it's an interval
timer
what you're saying is it's like the two
marshmallow experiment done at stanford
def defer the dopamine
and actually if you can turn the waiting
into the dopamine and then
you can extend out the reward for you
know waiting for the second marshmallow
15 minutes later et cetera et cetera and
there are many many examples of this in
the psychology and neuroscience
literature and i would say finally in
2020 we finally as a field got a clear
idea of how dopamine is really working
because before it was all about
work dopamine hit right
sex gives you a doubling hit the
internet gives you a dopamine what we
didn't realize is that repeated
engagement with these things leads to
dopamine depletion
and that the pain and pleasure balance
is always at work
dude that's so brilliant dude
one the huberman lab is amazing on
youtube people need to check that [__]
out and your instagram page is also
amazing
where do you want people to follow you
at yeah so well thanks um for those kind
words um yes i mean them so aggressively
i'll bite through the camera to let
people know how seriously i mean that
thank you yeah so i i have an instagram
page it's huberman lab and there i teach
neuroscience in anywhere from one minute
to you know five minute tidbits and a
lot of actionable tools that relate to
all sorts of things sleep and motivation
etc and then the huberman lab podcast is
apple spotify and we have a youtube
channel for people want to watch and
listen to it and they're
it's a little bit different than most
podcasts because i will do four episodes
all on one general theme like food and
the brain
and these are long
hour to two hour long lectures where i
just kind of blab on and on myself but
they're all time stamps so people can
get information there and it's tools and
science and then we have great guests on
who are expert in their fields people
like anna lemke um luminaries and the
you know matt walker folks of that sort
of robert
who i've been stocking
there's a there's a there's a trick